Before I begin, I would like to make one thing very clear: I do believe that Clefable is better than Aromatisse, and anyone with even a speck of common sense will share that opinion. I am here to disprove the idea that Aromatisse is an "unmon," as some have called it recently. It is my belief that Aromatisse is an amazing low tier fairy type and easily one of the best. I'm not sure if I would consider it *the best,* but that's a can of worms for another copypasta. Let's start this off with a simple question: is Clefable bulky? Once again, anyone and everyone with even a shred of common sense would certainly agree that Clefable is a bulky Pokemon. Now ask, is Aromatisse bulky? I can't see how anyone who said yes to the first question can say no to the second question. Clefables base HP is 95, its physical defense is 73, and its special defense is 90. Aromatisse's HP is 101, its physical defense is 72, and its special defense is 89. The numbers are so incredibly similar that I don't understand how anyone can consider one bulky and not the other. Another problem that some people believe Aromatisse has is that it's easy setup fodder whereas Clefable is not. Clefable has access to a lot of different coverage moves including Fire Blast to bop the steel types that would otherwise eat Moonblasts for days, and it has a base special attack stat of 95, which is solid enough to prevent various threats from setting up. Moreover, Clefable has access to the ability Unaware, so under most circumstances, trying to set up in front of a Clefable is a futile effort in the first place, as attacks will do the same damage as they would without the stat boosts. Clefable is not setup fodder, and contrary to popular belief, neither is Aromatisse. Aromatisse has a base special attack stat of 99, even better than Clefable's. It has access to stab Moonblast, as well as decent coverage options in Thunderbolt, Psychic, and Energy Ball. Obviously that's nowhere near as amazing as Clefable's movepool, but the fact is, on top of Aromatisse's powerful Moonblast, it has access to a few moves that can hit Pokemon for more damage that it would be able to otherwise. Not to mention that it obviously has access to Hidden Power, so if you're up against a team with something like Heatran, you can run Hidden Power Ground to try to get off nice damage on a switch. Another problem for clerics is getting taunted. If they get taunted, they have to go on the offensive, which they aren't meant to do. They can be offensive if need be, but the goal of a cleric is to heal up the team, and they can't do that when faced with a Pokemon with taunt. Aromatisse's Aroma Veil prevents it from being taunted, thereby allowing it to do its job of healing up the team without fail.
The fact remains that Clefable is still better than Aromatisse. Clefable is arguably the best fairy type in the game, and Aromatisse is considered low tier. For starters, Clefable has access to extra support options like Stealth Rock. Daily reminder that Stealth Rock Clefable is broken and will always get them up. Furthermore, it has access to moves like Soft Boiled and Moonlight (although the former is clearly superior under nearly every scenario imaginable), so it doesn't have to rely on Wish as its only means of sustain. Aromatisse doesn't have that luxury, as it's forced to run Wish + Protect under basically all circumstances. While it has access to moves like Calm Mind and Trick Room, it never has the opportunity to use them because it's burdened with Wish and Protect. Clefable also has access to Magic Guard, which makes it an even better tank, as it becomes immune to hazards, Leech Seed, Toxic, and other attempts by the opponent to chip down tanks. Clefable can run a variety of different sets, such as Cosmic Power, Calm Mind, even Belly Drum if you're really crazy, all while having access to single-turn sustain. All of this is where Clefable outshines Aromatisse. There's no debate there. But again, that's not what I'm here to disprove. I want to show the world that Aromatisse is not an "unmon," but instead a fantastic pick late in a draft. If you need a low tier fairy type or a low tier wish passer, Aromatisse fits the bill perfectly. It can heal up the team, it can cure status, and it's not setup fodder. The next time someone talks trash about Aromatisse, I want you to link this copypasta. We need the world to come to the realization that Aromatisse is good. It's just as bulky as Clefable, considered to be one of the most reliable tanks in the game. It isn't setup fodder, as it has an even higher special attack stat than Clefable with a decent enough movepool to cover for most other Pokemon. If Clefable is a reliable wish passer, cleric, and not setup fodder, then neither is Aromatisse. To the two people who read this all the way through, I hope you have now seen the power of Aromatisse. Even if everyone else continues saying it's an "unmon," that just means you can draft it in the last round with no risk of it being sniped, giving you an amazing secret weapon on your roster. Once your opponents see you using Aromatisse to success, maybe they will come to the light as well. And when that happens, I'll be able to rub it in their faces and say "I told you so."
